In the third part of the booking section,
let's now finally build our custom radio buttons.
But before we do that, let's just add
something that we were missing here,
which is the animation as soon as we click here
or as the color changes, okay?
So this bar here, this underlying color.
So this has no animation right now.
So we should very quickly just add that,
so the transition property
and all, let's say 0.3 seconds.
And so that should be different now.
And yeah, you saw that.
So it's much nicer now.
Okay, so what do we have here
on these radio buttons?
Well, you see that we have two elements here.
So basically this one here and this one,
and then when you click,
of course, the button becomes active
and we choose the option that we click on.
So let's start with the HTML here.
And so once again, let's do a form group.
And I forgot to put the dot.
Now, for each of them, we actually want a container here.
So let's say
form_radio-group.
Okay, and then in here,
so just before, we will have an input and a label.
So input, I'm gonna call this one
form_radio-input this time, okay?
So before it was called form_input.
Now it's form_radio-input.
And the type is a radio button.
And then we need an ID to connect it to the label.
We're gonna put there next,
and so the first one is for small tours.
So I'm gonna call it just small, okay?
And now the label.
And so following the same logic, form_radio-label,
and then form is the ID of the input we specified,
and so it's small, of course.
And in here,
small tour group.
And let's just go ahead and copy this one.
It's large now, and again
down here and here, large tour group.
And so we're good to go to check this out.
And so here we go.
So now if we click this text,
then the radio button here gets selected.
And if we click on this one,
then this one gets selected.
But the problem is that the other one
still stays selected here, of course.
And that's because we forgot one attribute
in the HTML, okay?
So in order for the HTML to consider them as a group,
we need to give them the same name.
So it doesn't really matter here,
just call it size because if it's for
our small or large tours,
so it's basically for the size of the tour.
Okay, and so they need to have the same name attribute here.
Okay, and so now either one of them can be selected
because all of the inputs with the same name,
only one of them can be selected.
And that's the logic behind that.
And so now when you hit this one,
this gets selected, and then this one.
Of course you can click on the button, as well.
And okay, so that's the functionality.
Now, in CSS, we cannot style these buttons, okay?
So these radio buttons, we have no way
of styling them in CSS.
And so what we have to do is to basically build
our own buttons.
And that's exactly what we're gonna do.
And we'll do that inside of these labels here, okay?
So let's do that.
So right here inside of the label,
I will simply add a span element
and call it form_radio-button.
And I saw that I misspelled this here again.
So form_radio-button now.
And I'm gonna leave it empty, okay?
So this is just for style.
There's not really content in there.
And, okay.
So this is what the button will be, all right?
And we'll then hide simply this input element here.
So this new element here will become our button,
and we will hide this input.
And that is the trick.
Now, since we connected the label with the input,
then even if this is hidden,
it will still become selected, okay?
And that's the trick here.
So when we click on this text here, on this label,
what gets selected is the input.
But with our HTML, we will make it look
as if this button here will become selected,
while the original button is hidden.
And so that's the logic behind
what we're gonna do here.
And so let's implement that.
So first of all, let's style these ones here,
so the radio groups, to make them side by side.
So form_radio-group,
give them a width of 50%,
and then put them side by side.
We could use floats now, but what I'm gonna do here
is to simply set their display property
to inline blocks, and then therefore
they will not create the line breaks
and will be displayed side by side, hopefully.
All right, now, about the label.
So radio-label,
let's give it a font size of 1.6.
And that's actually our standard font size,
if you remember.
So just want here default font size
and a cursor of pointer.
So basically what this will do
is to make it look like a link or something.
So with this hand,
so this is what I mean, okay?
So this hand here showing up.
Now, they're not really side by side.
Let me
check out what's going on here.
So they are actually 50%.
But for some reason they're not really showing up.
Let me try to decrease that.
All right, so that just put it to 49.
It's really the same, okay?
It doesn't really matter.
So let's just make it 49%.
So I prefer this to using floats instead.
All right, so we have the radio-group,
the radio-label.
Now we have the
radio-button here itself.
So this one here, as I was saying,
we're gonna hide it, but let's leave that for later.
We'll just do that in the end.
For now, let's style this radio-button here.
So our custom button, basically.
Radio-button.
And this one is actually composed of two parts.
And let me show that to you.
So we have this green thing here outside this circle here.
And then the inside, which is this green dot,
it's a different element.
And that way, we can either have the empty radio button
like this one here
or the selected button, where we then simply display
this green part in the middle, so this dot.
So it's the radio button.
And then inside, for the dot,
we're gonna create another element.
But instead of doing it in the HTML,
we're going to make a pseudo-element, okay?
So we're gonna use the after pseudo-element.
So first off, let's give it a height and a width,
so a 2D button.
And since we want it to be a circle,
it will have the same height and the same width,
so both 30 pixels.
Then we give it that border, that green border.
So five pixel solid and our primary color.
And then we give it a border radius of 50%
in order to make it completely round.
And now take a look at that.
Well, it isn't quite working yet, okay?
And that is because we should make it a block element.
Okay, so once again, these properties,
they only work
if we give it a block or an inline block element here.
For now, block should work.
All right, but now what's happening
is that they actually occupy this line on themselves.
So yeah, inline block is probably a better option.
So inline block.
But still, it's now a bit difficult
to actually position this element
inside of the radio-label element.
So let's use absolute positioning
in order to put it exactly where we want it to be.
So position absolute.
And remember, in order for that to work,
we have to make the parent relative.
So that is radio-label.
So position relative.
And now we should here be able to position it.
So at the left, we want it to be zero,
and then from the top, I'm not really sure.
Let's start with zero as well.
And then we can adjust as we go.
Well, that looks a bit weird.
So let's inspect that.
And so the problem is now that they overlap each other
because of course the text starts
at the beginning of the element,
and so does the new button.
And so let's just give it some padding on the left side,
and then we'll put the text where we want it to be.
So radio-label, and we're gonna do
five rem here, okay?
And maybe on the top we should give it something negative
to move it up a bit
cause I thought it was not really well aligned.
And well, that wasn't quite what I wanted.
So let's check out what's going on here again.
And yeah, okay, no.
I put the padding at the entire element
and not just on the left side.
So big mistake here.
And now it will work.
Okay, now that was maybe a bit too much,
but I can decrease that.
Now let's take care of that inner side
that we have to put here.
And so we specified this after pseudo-element
in order to do that.
Just increasing the padding here,
and maybe this one here was actually well at zero.
We can change that later, once again.
So the inner element now,
how do we want to do this?
Again, it's a circle, right?
So let's specify its height and its width.
Starting with one rem, but we can adjust it
on the go if it's not perfect.
So width, one rem.
And remember, each time that we use a pseudo-element,
we have to actually specify its content property.
And as always, I set it to empty.
And also the display property, and I set it to block here.
And as I was saying, we want it to be a circle.
So for the radius, 50%.
Now, we want it to be positioned
exactly in the center of the outer circle, right?
And so we're gonna use our old trick for that
with absolute positioning.
So position absolute.
And for that, we need to set the position on the parent.
But it's actually already set.
And it doesn't really have to be relative, okay?
It can be absolute as well.
It just has to be specified.
And so now, top 50%,
left 50% as well,
and then the old transform trick.
I will translate everything minus 50%.
Okay, one thing that we forgot, of course,
is the background color.
That should color primary as well.
And so, yeah.
Let's take a look now at that.
And so yeah, here we go.
It's a bit too small, I think.
And so let's increase that to maybe 1.3.
Okay.
And yeah, that looks much better.
And now we're almost there.
So now we have to hide these,
these little dots here,
so that they are empty in the beginning
just like these, right?
So they have to be empty.
And remember, we're gonna hide them,
these ones here, in the end.
But for now, let's keep them there.
So they have to be empty, so we simply have to
make these circles here invisible.
And we can then move up this entire thing here
a bit to the top, actually.
So opacity should be zero.
And here, we need this one after all, okay?
So maybe should be minus two
or something like that.
Or maybe even more.
Let's check out how much we need, actually.
Minus three, minus four,
yeah, minus four looks good to me.
So minus four.
All right, now it's time that we have to make
our magic happen.
So what is that magic?
Well, the magic is that each time
we hit this element here,
so like this or like this,
we have to make this circle here,
the green one, appear in the center, right?
So basically put the opacity
of the after pseudo-element to one.
So how do we do that?
Well, what we can do is to use another pseudo-class,
which is called checked.
And that pseudo-class is available
on all the radio buttons which are,
as you can see here, checked.
So right now, this radio button here,
it has the checked pseudo-class.
And so we can use that to our advantage, okay?
So let's do exactly that.
So
radio-input
checked.
So right now, we have all the radio-input elements
selected which are checked, all right?
Now what we want to manipulate
is not the radio-input but instead
the radio-button here, right?
So how do we do that?
Well, right now this one here is selected,
but we want to select this one here.
Now, the thing is that this span element
is not a direct child of this one,
of the radio-input, right?
And so what do we do?
Well, once again, we use the sibling selector
to first select the label,
and then from there we can select this child,
so this radio-button here, right?
So let's do that.
So we select the sibling,
and we can use the adjacent sibling selector again
because it is a direct sibling.
But this time, just to make it a bit different,
let's actually use this one.
It will work just the same way.
And so now we select the radio-label.
So that is the sibling.
And then we want the child element of this one.
And that is the radio-button.
And what we really want is the after pseudo-element,
so this one here, right?
So that is a huge selector.
And I know that it's quite a complicated one, right?
But it's all actually pretty logical.
You just have to wrap your head around the logic
that's going on here, okay?
So let me try to explain it one more time.
So as soon as we hit the label element,
the radio-input becomes checked.
So we have this checked pseudo-class available to us.
And what we do then is to simply select
the sibling of that one, and then the child
because that's the one that we want to change
each time that the radio input is selected.
And what we want to do, we want to give it
an opacity of one.
So it was zero, and now it will be one.
That just adds the transition here, of course.
Transition.
And the only one that we're really gonna manipulate
is opacity, and so let's actually write that out here,
in 0.2 seconds, okay?
So let's now check it out.
And so here we go.
You saw that?
It actually selected the correct element.
All right, and so basically now this button
replaces this one.
It has the exact same functionality, okay?
And this is how you style radio buttons.
The same thing actually works for check boxes, okay?
So it's the same logic.
We also have the checked pseudo-class available to us,
and we can then go on and do the exact same manipulation.
And so the last step is to actually hide
the radio-input element, right?
So this one here, cause of course
we don't want to see it.
So let's do it right here.
Radio-input.
Display none.
That's it.
That's how it works.
All right, and now there's just one last thing,
which is to actually add this button.
But that should be pretty easy, right?
Because we already have the button.
Now, the difference here is that we
cannot use an anchor element in here.
But let's see that in a second.
So for now, let's add another group here.
And then the button.
And so we already have the button, as I was saying.
And also the green style of the button.
Next step.
Okay, so as I was saying, in a form,
we really need a real button element,
not just an anchor link,
because this button here will allow us
to submit the form, okay?
And so the form understands that if there's a button,
then when we click that button,
that should be the submit button, okay?
And we can actually also go ahead
and use our right arrow here,
like there is in the original version.
And so
let's check that out.
And well, that doesn't really look like
the one that we specified, right?
And that's because this one is a button element.
And so we have to actually go ahead
and make some change to our original button.
But nothing really too difficult.
So the first thing is that buttons,
they by default come with a border.
And so we should change that.
So let me just add a comment here.
So let's just remove that border
to none.
Then also we want a cursor of pointer again.
So that little hand cursor.
So let's see if that changed a thing.
Well, actually not.
Well,
let me check out what's going on here.
So what I'm seeing here is that the button class
is actually not really getting applied here, okay?
So let's check that out.
And now I see why that is, actually.
So these styles here, you see?
These only get applied to the button with the link
and the visited pseudo-classes, right?
Now, our button doesn't have any of these pseudo-classes.
And so therefore nothing of this actually gets applied.
And so this is great for me to show you actually,
the difference between a button element
or an anchor tag.
So the button doesn't have the link and the visited.
So what we can do here
is to simply do it like this, right?
Because this will translate into button.
So just button, so that all of these get applied
to our button element as well.
So that, yeah.
Okay, so that actually already worked here.
Right?
Oh, and you see this blue border here around it?
That is the focus, okay?
So the same focus as this one.
Now, once before, as I told you in the beginning,
we should not really remove simply the focus here.
We could go in and say focus outline none,
but for accessibility reasons, we should not do that.
So let's just do something else
and say that the focus should look
the exact same way as the hover does.
Okay?
Or maybe even the active, okay,
because this actually happens when we hit the button,
not when we just hover it.
So not here.
Let's take that out,
but instead it should be here, okay?
So we say outline none,
but then instead, this here happens.
And so we didn't completely remove that focus.
And so now it's gone,
and everything looks great.
Now, just one small change here.
We should add some
margin to the button of that one.
And we can simply do that in here,
or actually in here, with one of the helper classes.
So in utilities,
and let's just use this one here,
so just a medium space in there.
So that should do the trick.
Well, not really, actually.
Let me check.
And so you see now what's going on here.
And that's why I wanted to show you it
in the inspector.
So we have this two rem here that we specified
for all the form groups, and so that one takes precedence.
It's more specific, this selector's more specific.
So what can we do here?
Well, I'm doing something that I said we should not do.
But in utilities classes, it is different.
So when we add a utility class,
we really want to happen whatever we say
in one of these classes, right?
And so we actually want this to override everything else.
And so what we do is to use the important keyword.
So this is a normal practice,
to do it like this in the utility classes, okay?
And so yeah, now you see that it looks okay.
And actually, it looks great.
So let's test it again.
So everything looks great.
And so yeah, these buttons work as well.
So it's perfect.
And you saw it actually performed the action
that we specified.
So it went basically to this direction here,
which is just to go to the top of the page.
And it also reloaded it, okay?
So we successfully submitted a form.
Nothing happened, of course.
But that's not the point of this form.
The point was to style it.
And that's done, and it looks really great.
So let's now move on to the next lecture,
where we're gonna code up the footer of this website.